.\" Copyright (c) 1996, 1997 Peter Fox <fox@roestock.demon.co.uk>
.\" This program is distributed according to the Gnu General Public License.
.\" See the file COPYING in the isapnptools source distribution.
.\"
.\" $Id: isapnp.8,v 0.9 2001/01/06 21:15:45 fox Exp $
.\"
.TH ISAPNP 8 "05 Jan 2001" "isapnptools"
.SH NAME
isapnp \- Configure ISA Plug-and-Play devices.
.SH SYNOPSIS
\fBisapnp\fP [ \-\-help ] [ \-\-version ] \fIconffile\fP 
.SH DESCRIPTION
\fBisapnp\fP will carry out the instructions provided
in the \fIconffile\fP to configure ISA PnP cards.
\fBisapnp\fP must read in the entire configuration file
successfully before it will execute the commands: this
is to ensure the instructions are consistent and valid.
.br
The format of the configuration file is described
in \fBisapnp.conf(5)\fP.

.br
In version 1.16 and later of \fBisapnptools\fP, \fBisapnp\fP
checks resources are available as the devices are configured.
If there is a conflict, a diagnostic message is given, and
the program can be made to abort if required by placing the
appropriate settings in the configuration file.

.br
In version 1.18 and later of \fBisapnptools\fP, \fIconffile\fP
may be '-', meaning read the configuration file from stdin.

.br
\fBisapnp\fP will run with real-time scheduling if possible to achieve
the required IO timings. This will lock out all normal programs while
it executes. In version 1.19 and later of \fBisapnptools\fP,
\fBisapnp\fP will only run in this mode for 5 seconds, it then reverts
to standard scheduling like any other program. Previous versions
should only be run from a standard console as ^C will kill it from
there. If you run the command remotely (and X counts as remote), you
will not be able to kill it as no other programs can run.

.SS Options
.TP
.I "\-h, \-\-help"
Show a help summary.
.TP
.I "\-v, \-\-version"
Print the isapnptools version number on stderr.

.SH ERRORS
If the configuration file cannot be opened, the program
aborts immediately with a suitable message.

.br
If an error occurs later, a message is printed to standard error in
the form:

.br
\fIfile\fP:\fIlineno\fP -- \fIWarning/Fatal\fP - \fImessage\fP

where
.TP
\fCfile\fR
The configuration file being read ('-') for stdin.
.TP
\fClineno\fR
The line number that the error occured at (or noticed).
.TP
\fCWarning/Fatal\fR
Warning if the error was not serious and execution can continue,
Fatal if the program cannot proceed.
.TP
\fCmessage\fR
The error message, hopefully meaningful, see below.

.TP
\fCUnable to allocate memory for action list processing\fR

The program has run out of memory and will abort. Fit more memory, or
add more swap space. This is extremely unlikely as isapnp is normally
run during boot up, when there are no users logged on.

.TP
\fCISOLATE called twice, or after CSN - clearing board count\fR

You had an (ISOLATE..) after a previous occurance of (ISOLATE..) or
(CSN..).  The program will rescan for boards. You should fix your
script to only scan for boards once, by removing one of the above
statements.
.TP
\fCIRQ2 is not a valid selection, changing it to IRQ9 (See clarifications 4.6.2)\fR

Your configuration file attempted to configure a board to use
IRQ2. This is invalid according to the clarifications to the PnP ISA
spec v1.0a, and should be changed to use IRQ9, which has been
done. You should change your configuration file to use IRQ9 in the
first place.
.TP
\fCresource conflict allocating IRQx (see ...)\fR

Your configuration file has attempted to program a board to use an IRQ
line which is already used by something else. The see ... bit tells
you where the IRQ line was first flagged as being in use. Change the
script to use a different IRQ line, or fix the information being
provided if the line really isn't already used.
.TP
\fCresource conflict allocating n bytes of IO at x (see ...)\fR

Your configuration file has attempted to program a board to use IO
ports which are already used by something else. The see ... bit tells
you where the ports were first flagged as being in use. Change the
script to use different ports, or fix the information being provided
if the ports really aren't already used.
.TP
\fCIO range check attempted while device activated\fR

Your configuration file has attempted to carry out an IO range check
on a device which has already been configured and activated. You must
either not attempt the check, or deactivate the device before the
check. This error is a sign that you are on shakey ground. If the
device is already activated, and you are running isapnp for the first
time, then some other program has already activated the device (may be
the BIOS, or some of the cleverer kernel drivers). You probably
shouldn't be attempting to configure the device at all. There could
already be drivers accessing the card.
.TP
\fCIO range check failed for n bytes of IO at x\fR

The IO range check failed. This is a sign that there is a conflict of
port addresses with some other device. Reassign the IO ports for this
device (or the other one if you know what is is and how to do it).
.TP
\fCresource conflict allocating DMAx (see ...)\fR

Your configuration file has attempted to program a board to use a DMA
line which is already used by something else. The see ... bit tells
you where the DMA line was first flagged as being in use. Change the
script to use a different DMA line, or fix the information being
provided if the line really isn't already used.
.TP
\fCresource conflict allocating Memory at a (see ...)\fR

Your configuration file has attempted to program a board to use memory
addresses which are already used by something else. The see ... bit
tells you where the addresses were first flagged as being in
use. Change the script to use different addresses, or fix the
information being provided if the addresses really aren't already
used.

.br
The following messages may also occur:
.TP
\fCREALTIME operation timeout exceeded - Switching to normal scheduling\fR

The program has been running for more than 5 seconds, so something is
probably wrong. Rather than lock up your machine, it is switching out
of real-time mode so that other programs can run again. The program will
now probably run slower. If this message occurs, you may want to kill
isapnp.
.TP
\fCCouldn't clear real-time scheduling, may continue to use all CPU for a while\fR

The program has been running for more than 5 seconds, but the attempt
to leave real-time mode failed (impossible !), so there will be a
further 5 second delay, then if it hasn't finished by then the program
will kill itself.
.TP
\fCTime expired - aborting program\fR

The above happened (even though it's impossible !). The program is
killing itself.
.TP
\fCPort address xx (0x..) out of range 0x203..0x3ff\fR

You have provided an invalid READPORT address - fix it.
.TP
\fCREADPORT not set\fR

You have not specified a READPORT, and not done an (ISOLATE..) which
would find one, so the program cannot proceed. Either specify a READPORT
or carry out an (ISOLATE..).
.TP
\fCRead port x cannot be allocated - resource conflict (see ...)\fR

The READPORT is already in use. Choose another.
.TP
\fCTimeout attempting to read resource data - is READPORT correct ?\fR

The status bit to signal the resource data was valid never got set,
this could be due to a conflict with your choice of READPORT address,
try another.
.TP
\fCLD setting verify failed, this may not be a problem. Try adding (VERIFYLD N) to the top of your script\fR

Reading back the logical device selection register failed. It appears
some boards do this if you access the devices in the wrong order. Do
like it says, and add (VERIFYLD N) to the top of your script and see
if the board configures ok.
.TP
\fCCan only poke bytes\fR

You've tried to poke a value outside the range 0..255. Fix your
script.
.TP
\fCDon't know what to do with ... on or around line x\fR

You've got a syntax error somewhere. If the word is a valid command,
you've probably got braces not matching. Fix your script.
.TP
\fCUnable to get io permission for WRITE_DATA\fR

You are not superuser. Only superuser has the required permissions to
run isapnp.
.TP
\fCnanosleep failed\fR

Impossible ! If it happens, the program will to run in real-time mode.

.SH FILES
.TP
\fC/sbin/isapnp\fR
The executable.
.TP
\fC/etc/isapnp.conf\fR
The standard place for the \fIconffile\fP.
.TP
\fC/etc/isapnp.gone\fR
The standard place for describing resources that are unavailable,
but not flagged as such in /proc/* etc. The format of this file
is explained in the example provided with \fBisapnptools\fP.
.SH BUGS
Check http://www.roestock.demon.co.uk/isapnptools/ for latest
information and FAQ.

If you think you have found one not mentioned in the latest version,
please send a report to isapnp@roestock.demon.co.uk.
.SH WARNING
This program can reset all your Plug-and-Play devices.
It can also lock up your machine.
Use at your own risk.
.SH AUTHOR
\fBisapnp\fP has been written by Peter Fox <fox@roestock.demon.co.uk>,
the creator and maintainer of isapnptools.
.SH AVAILABILITY
The latest version of the sources may be obtained by ftp from
ftp://ftp.demon.co.uk/pub/unix/linux/utils
.br
Or follow the pointer from my web page at
http://www.roestock.demon.co.uk/
.SH REFERENCES
Plug and Play ISA Specification, Version 1.0a, May 5, 1994.
Available from ftp://ftp.microsoft.com/developr/drg/Plug-and-Play/Pnpspecs
.SH "SEE ALSO"
pnpdump(8), isapnp.conf(5)
